Jonathan's Space Report
No. 527                                        2004 Jun 2, Denver, Colorado
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the American Astronomical Society in Denver, the science highlight
was an all-day session of the spectacular first results from the Spitzer
Space Telescope. Warmest congratulations to my many friends involved in
the Spitzer mission. IRAS, the US-UK-Netherlands satellite which flew
the first significant infrared mission in 1983, wasn't very sensitive,
even though it cataloged hundreds of thousands of infrared sources. It
also had poor angular resolution, giving a very fuzzy image of the sky.
ISO, Europe's follow-on mission in the 1990s, gave excellent results on
bright sources in our Galaxy but was beset with calibration problems
which limited its ability to study faint extragalactic objects. Spitzer
takes far sharper and deeper images, far more sensitive spectra, and 
appears to be by far the most well calibrated infrared mission to date.
It has shown itself able to reveal beautiful detail in nearby star
forming regions and to detect faint and distant galaxies. After multiple
cutbacks, redesigns and descopes, my friends used to joke that
SIRTF/Spitzer, the last of NASA's Great Observatories program, was now
only a 'Pretty Good Observatory' but I think we now have to apologize
and welcome it fully into  Great Observatory status together with Hubble,
Chandra, and the deceased Compton.

NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe, in a speech on Jun 1 to the American
Astronomical Society meeting in Denver, clarified NASA's new strategy by
confirming that basic astronomy research remains part of NASA's mission
- something that had not been entirely clear in the confusion at NASA HQ
and elsewhere following the presidential announcement of the Exploration
initiative and the subsequent budget revisions. He mentioned future (and
recently delayed) research missions such as Constellation X by name -to
audible sighs of relief from those sitting near me - and acknowledged
the success of Explorer missions like WMAP. However, things got a bit
murkier in a later press conference (he did not take questions from the
astronomer audience) when he was asked whether the astronomical
community's own assessment of science priorities remained valid.  The
Decadal Survey study is astronomy's traditional method of avoiding
internal food fights at budget time by establishing a consensus
beforehand - in the latest study, prioritizing the JWST and Con-X
missions. O'Keefe implied that the science community's opinion was only
one input among many to the priorities for the science program. He
referred to the new priorities as `a matter of sequencing', which I take
to be code for saying that planet-finding missions are to be given
priority over black-hole and early-universe studies at least in the near
term. (Perhaps he just meant that we need to do the Webb Telescope first
and then Con-X, but that doesn't explain some of the other budget shifts
in favor of missions like TPF.) Astronomers at the meeting seemed
reassured that there seems to be a commitment to carry out the broad
astrophysics program in the long run, but concerned that the new process
of mission prioritization appears much less transparent and more
top-down in contrast to the peer-community involvement of the past. The
new NASA strategy is still evolving, so it's possible that a more open
process will emerge.

O'Keefe addressed another specific concern of the astrophysics community,
the future of the Hubble Space Telescope, by announcing a request for
proposals for a robotic HST servicing mission. This would leverage
existing efforts such as the ASTRO/Orbital Express automated rendezvous
mission and the Canadian SPDM 'robot hand'; in one scenario, a robot
spacecraft would rendezvous and dock with HST, attaching itself to the
end of the aft shroud. The basic version would contain a deorbit module
to remove HST safely from orbit. A second, enhanced version could 
attach new batteries and gyros to the spacecraft, prolonging its life
before deorbit. A third version would also use a robot arm to replace
the WFPC-2 camera with the already-built WFC-3, and possibly open the
aft shroud to install the COS spectrograph, making Hubble able to take
spectra of objects 10 times fainter than it is now able to. We'll see
when the proposals come in whether the third version (the one
astronomers are interested in!) is plausible. I believe that it is all
realistic, with the possible exception of the COS installation - the
astronauts have had some trouble in the past reclosing the doors, and
I'm not sure how easy it will be for a robot to do this, but maybe it's
fine. The big issue is the funding - O'Keefe refused to speculate on the
cost but some rumours talk of a billion-dollar class mission. He did say
that most of the cost would come from the Exploration budget (rather
than science) since the point is partly to develop a general capability
for robotic servicing. 

ESA has completed its report on the Beagle 2 Mars lander failure, but
the report has not been publicly released. Nevertheless, a press release
indicates several areas identified as possible contributors to the
failure: problems due to shocks from pyro firings in spacecraft
separation events; problematic cross-connected wiring; possible
collision between the lander and its jettisoned heat shield, and
possible air bag or parachute failure.

Progress M-49 (spacecraft Progress 7K-TGM No. 249) was launched from
Baykonur on May 25. The vessel carries cargo for the Space Station,
including spacesuit Orlan-M No. 27, and is ISS flight 14P.
The spacecraft docked with the Zvezda module on May 27 at 1355 UTC.

Kosmos-2407, launched on May 28 into a 400 km, 65 degree orbit is
a US-PU electronic intelligence satellite for the Russian Navy.

The USAF weather satellite DMSP Block 5D-2 F-11 (S-12), launched in 1991
and retired in 1995, has exploded in orbit with debris objects
generated. It seems likely the fragmentation was due to either a battery
explosion or to residual fuel in the attitude control system.

Table of Recent Launches
-----------------------

Date UT       Name            Launch Vehicle  Site            Mission    INTL.
                                                                          DES.
Apr 16 0045   Superbird 6       Atlas IIAS      Canaveral SLC36A  Comms      11A
Apr 18 1559   Shiyan 1 )        CZ-2C           Xichang           Imaging    12A  
              Naxing 1 )                                          Tech       12
Apr 19 0319   Soyuz TMA-4       Soyuz-FG        Baykonur LC1      Spaceship  13A
Apr 20 1657   Gravity Probe B   Delta 7920      Vandenberg SLC2W  Science    14A
Apr 26 2037   Ekspress AM-11    Proton-K/DM-01  Baykonur LC200/39 Comms      15A
May  4 1242   DirecTV-7S        Zenit-3SL       Odyssey, Pacific  Comms      16A 
May 19 2222   AMC-11            Atlas IIAS      Canaveral SLC36B  Comms      17A
May 20 1747   ROCSAT-2          Taurus          Vandenberg 576-E  Imaging    18A
May 25 1234   Progress M-49     Soyuz-U         Baykonur LC1      Cargo      19A
May 28 0600   Kosmos-2407       Tsiklon-2       Baykonur LC90/20  Sigint     20A

.-------------------------------------------------------------------------.
|  Jonathan McDowell                 |  phone : (617) 495-7176            |
|  Somerville MA 02143               |  inter : jcm@host.planet4589.org   |
|  USA                               |          jcm@cfa.harvard.edu       |
|                                                                         |
| JSR: http://www.planet4589.org/jsr.html                                 |
| Back issues:  http://www.planet4589.org/space/jsr/back                  |
| Subscribe/unsub: mail majordomo@host.planet4589.org, (un)subscribe jsr  |   
'-------------------------------------------------------------------------'   

