Jonathan's Space Report

Dec 5,1989 (no.30)
OK, let's catch up on the backlog...
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Two major astrophysics missions were orbited this past month:

The Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) was launched by Delta 5920 from
Vandenberg on Nov 18.  COBE carries three instruments to study the
diffuse extragalactic background radiation.  The DMR experiment is
searching for spatial variations in the 3K microwave background
radiation: is the radiation slightly more intense in some directions
than in others? The FIRAS experiment is studying the spectrum of the
background radiation: how does the intensity of the radiation vary with
wavelength? Is there an extra source of background radiation in the
submillimetre wavelength range? The DIRBE experiment will study the
amount of radiation at somewhat shorter infrared wavelengths, mapping
the distribution of dust in our Galaxy and possibly from galaxies at
high redshift.

The 'Granat' X-ray astrophysical observatory was launched by Proton
from Baykonur on Dec 2; it carries Soviet and French x-ray and gamma-ray
telescopes.

November also saw the flight of Discovery on the STS-33 mission, which
deployed a payload in a low 28 degree orbit on Nov 23. The payload
was probably a Mentor (alias Magnum) signals intelligence satellite
for the National Security Agency, boosted to geostationary orbit
with an IUS upper stage.

On November 26, the Kvant-2 space station module was put in orbit.
The module is due to dock with the Mir station, and carries an EVA
airlock and EVA manoeuvring unit. One of two solar arrays failed to
deploy initially, but has now been fully extended. The first attempt
to dock with Mir failed on Dec 2, and another attempt is due this week.

Kosmos-2049, launched Nov 17, is an advanced reconnaissance satellite.
Kosmos-2050, launched Nov 23, is an early warning satellite operated by
 the PVO (Soviet Air Defence). 
Kosmos-2051, launched Nov 24, is a recon satellite.
The 36th Molniya-3 communications satellite was orbited on Nov 28.

A number of large satellites have reentered recently: the Kosmos-122
weather satellite on Nov 14, the Kosmos-1064 navigation satellite on Nov
12, the Kosmos-1662 radar calibration satellite on Nov 16, and the Solar
Max satellite on Dec 2. 


The STS-32 mission is due for launch on Dec 18 from Complex 39A.

(c) 1989 Jonathan McDowell



 
